CREDITS
-------

Reg was written by Martijn Faassen; the core mapping code was
originally co-authored by Thomas Lotze.

Reg is heavily inspired by ``zope.interface`` and ``zope.component``,
by Jim Fulton and a lot of Zope developers.

History according to Martijn
----------------------------

This code went through a bit of history:

The core registry (mapping) code was conceived by Thomas Lotze and
myself as a speculative sandbox project in january of 2010. It was
called ``iface`` then:

http://svn.zope.org/Sandbox/faassen/iface/

In early 2012, I was at a sprint in NÃ¼rnberg, Germany organized by
Novareto. Inspired by discussions with the sprint participants,
particularly the Cromlech developers Souheil Chelfouh and Alex Garel,
I created a project called Crom:

https://github.com/faassen/crom

Crom focused on rethinking component and adapter registration and
lookup, but was still based on ``zope.interface`` for its fundamental
``AdapterRegistry`` implementation and the ``Interface`` metaclass. I
worked a bit on Crom after the sprint, but soon I moved on to other
matters.

At the Plone conference held in Arnhem, the Netherlands in October
2012, I gave a lightning talk about Crom. I figured what Crom needed
was a rewrite of the core adapter registry, i.e. what was in the iface
project. In the end of 2012 I mailed Thomas Lotze asking whether I
could merge iface into Crom, and he gave his kind permission.

The core registry code of iface was never quite finished however, and
while the iface code was now in Crom, Crom didn't use it yet. Thus it
lingered some more.

In July 2013 in development work for CONTACT (contact.de), I found
myself in need of clever registries. Crom also had some configuration
code intermingled with the component architecture code and I didn't
want this anymore.

So I reorganized the code yet again into another project, this one:
Reg. I then finished the core mapping code and hooked it up to the
Crom-style API, which I refactored further. For interfaces, I used
Python's ``abc`` module.
